The Project Gutenberg eBook, Emelian the Fool, Edited by Thomas J. Wise,
Translated by George Borrow


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Emelian the Fool
       a tale


Editor: Thomas J. Wise

Release Date: October 6, 2008  [eBook #26789]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMELIAN THE FOOL***


Transcribed from the 1913 Thomas J. Wise pamphlet by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                            EMELIAN THE FOOL
                                A TALE


                      _Translated from the Russian_
                                    BY
                              GEORGE BORROW

                                 LONDON:
                     PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION

                                   1913




INTRODUCTION


The tale of _Emelian_, of which we give here a version, is highly popular
amongst the peasantry of Russia, and is told by them at their
merry-makings from the upper shores of the Gulf of Finland to the Ural
Mountains.  It bears some resemblance to the tale of _Aladdin_, the pike
playing in the Russian story much the same part as the lamp in the
Arabian one, and it is by no means impossible that both tales are derived
from the same myth.  But from whatever source the story of _Emelian_ may
have sprung, the manner in which it is wrought is essentially Russian,
and from it, as here rendered, the English reader may form a better idea
of the way of life, and the feelings of the Russian mujiks, or peasantry,
than from a dozen common books of travels in Russia.  Emelian is
represented as a fool, but there is much in what he says and does common
to the Russian mujik in general.  He lies in the izbushka, or cabin, upon
the petsch, or stove, and when told to get up, he says: “What should I
get up for?—Mnie zdies teplo, i ia lieniós—’tis warm here, and I am
lazy.”  There spoke the genuine mujik, the most prominent features of
whose character are a love of warmth and a hatred of exertion, though,
when he chooses to get up and rouse himself, he is capable of very great
things, can outwit the tchort himself, bear hunger and fatigue better
than any other man, and contend even with the Briton at the game of the
bayonet.  Perhaps we may hereafter present to the public in an English
dress some other popular tales illustrative of the manner of life and
ideas of the mujiks, to whom the attention of the English public has of
late been much directed, owing to the ukase of the present Tsar, by which
they are emancipated from serfdom,—a measure likely to be productive of
much weal or woe throughout his extensive dominions.

The tale is as follows:—




EMELIAN THE FOOL


In a certain village there lived a mujik, or yeoman, who had three sons;
two were clever, but the third was a fool, who was called Emelian.  When
the good man had reached an extreme old age, he called all his sons to
him, and said:

“Dear children, I feel that I have not long to live; I therefore leave
you house and cattle, which you will divide in equal portions.  I also
leave you money: a hundred roubles for each.”

Soon after these words he died, and his children, having given him a
decent funeral, lived very comfortably.  After a little time, the
brothers of Emelian took it into their heads to start for the city, and
employ in traffic the three hundred roubles which their father had left
them; so they said to the fool Emelian:

“Harkee, fool, we are going to the city, and will take your hundred
roubles with us, and if our traffic goes on profitably we will buy you a
red caftan, a red cap, and red boots; but do you remain at home, and if
your sisters-in-law, our wives (for they were married) order you to do
anything, be sure you do it.”

The fool, wishing to receive the red caftan, red cap, and red boots, told
his brothers in reply that he would do whatever his sisters-in-law should
order him.  After this, his brothers set out for the city, and the fool
remained at home, and lived with his sisters-in-law.  After some time, on
a certain day, when it was winter, and there was a terrible frost, his
sisters-in-law told him to go for water; but the fool, who was lying on
the petsch, or stove, said:

“Yes, indeed, and why not you?”

“Why not we, you fool?” cried the sisters-in-law; “don’t you see what a
frost it is? and that none but a man can go out in such weather?”

“But,” said he, “I am lazy.”

“Lazy?” screamed his sisters-in-law; “won’t you presently want something
to eat?  And if there be no water how can we boil anything?”  Thereupon
they added, “Very well, when our husbands come home with the red caftan
and cap they promised him, we will tell them to give him nothing.”

When the fool heard this he thought it best to go, for he wished very
much to get the red caftan and cap.  So getting down from the petsch he
began to put on his stockings and boots, and to dress himself; and when
he was quite dressed, he took with him a couple of pails and a hatchet,
and went to the river: for the village in which they lived stood very
near the river.  When he had come to the stream, he began to hew away at
the ice, and when he had made a very big hole, he filled his pails with
water, and placing them on the ice, he stood beside the hole, and looked.
Now as the fool stood and looked he saw a very large pike swimming in the
hole.  Fool as Emelian was, he nevertheless wished to catch the pike.  He
therefore advanced softly, and coming near to it, seized it suddenly with
his hand, and pulling it out of the water, placed it in his bosom, and
began to make for home.  But the pike said to him:

“How’s this, fool? for what do you seize me?”

“For what?” said he; “I shall carry you home, and tell my sisters-in-law
to boil you.”

“Not so, fool, don’t carry me home, but put me back into the water, and I
will make you a rich man.”

But the fool did not believe him, and was making for home.  The pike,
seeing that the fool did not let him go, said:

“Listen, fool, do but put me into the water, and I will do for you
whatsoever you wish, so that every desire of your heart shall be
fulfilled.”

The fool, hearing these words, was very glad; for, as he was excessively
lazy, he thought to himself—

“If the pike does whatever I ask all will be got ready for me, and I
shall have no need to work.”

He therefore said to the pike:

“I will let you go, only do what you promise.”

Thereupon the pike made answer:

“First place me in the water, and I will fulfil my promise.”

But the fool said to him that he must first of all perform his promise,
and that he would then let him go.

The pike, seeing that he would not put him into the water, said:

“If you wish me to do for you what you want, you must now tell me what it
is that you desire.”

The fool said:

“I desire that my pails of water should march of themselves up the hill”
(for the village stood upon a hill), “but so that none of the water be
spilt out of them.”

The pike immediately said to him:

“Remember, Emelian, the words which I am about to say to you, and the
words are as follows: ‘At the pike’s behest, and at my request, march,
pails, by yourselves up the hill.’”

The fool repeated the words after the pike:

“At the pike’s behest, and at my request march, pails, by yourselves up
the hill.”

Forthwith the pails, and the yoke by which he was wont to carry them,
marched of themselves up the hill.  Emelian, seeing this, was very much
surprised, and said to the pike:

“Will it always be so?”

To which the pike made answer:

“All things you wish will be done, even as this has been done: only don’t
forget the words which I have taught you.”

Thereupon he released the pike into the water, and went himself after his
pails.  The neighbours, seeing what was going on, were filled with
wonder, and said, amongst, themselves—

“What is the fool about?  The pails of water walk of themselves, and he
walks after them.”

But Emelian, without saying anything to them, went home, and the pails
went of themselves into the keeping-room, and placed themselves on the
bench, while the fool mounted upon the petsch.  A little time after, his
sisters-in-law said to him again:

“Emelian, what do you lie there for? go and cut some wood.”

But the fool said:

“Yes, indeed, and why not you?”

“We?” screamed his sisters-in-law; “it is now winter, and if you do not
go and cut some wood you will soon be cold.”

“I am lazy,” said the fool.

“Lazy?” said his sisters-in-law to him, “then you will be frozen.”

Thereupon they added:

“If you don’t go and cut wood we will tell our husbands not to give you
the red caftan, nor the red cap, nor the boots.”

The fool, from the desire which he felt to obtain the red caftan, cap,
and boots, was obliged to comply with their request.  But as he was
thoroughly lazy, and did not wish to get down from the petsch, he said
these words softly as he lay:

“At the pike’s behest, and at my request, go, hatchet, now, and cut down
wood; and do you, wood, come of yourself to the room, and stow yourself
within the stove.”

Forthwith, the hatchet, without anyone taking it, hopped forth, and began
to cut away, and the wood of itself came into the room, and stowed itself
in the stove, at the sight of which the sisters-in-law wondered much at
the craft of Emelian; and every day, when the fool only ordered the
hatchet to go out and cut wood, the hatchet went and cut some.  And in
this manner he lived with his sisters-in-law for some time.  At length,
his sisters-in-law said to him:

“Emelian! we have no wood, so pray go out into the forest and cut some.”

The fool said: “Why don’t you go yourselves?”

“How should we go?” replied his sisters-in-law; “the forest is a great
way off, and as it is now winter, it is too cold for us to go to the
forest for wood.”

But the fool said to them:

“I am lazy.”

“Lazy!” cried his sisters-in-law; “if you don’t go you will soon be cold.
But if you refuse to go, when your brothers, our husbands, come home we
will order them to give you neither red caftan, red cap, nor red boots.”

The fool, wishing to obtain the red caftan, cap and boots, felt obliged
to go to the forest for wood, and getting up from the petsch, he began to
put on his stockings and boots, and to dress himself; and when he was
quite dressed he went out into the court, and drawing the sledge out of
the shed, and taking with him a rope and hatchet, he mounted the sledge,
and bade his sisters-in-law open the gate.  The sisters-in-law, seeing
that he got into the sledge without putting the horses to it, for the
fool did not lead out the horses, said to him:

“How is this, Emelian? you have got into the sledge without putting the
horses to it.”

But he said to them that he had no need of horses, and only wanted them
to open the gate.  The sisters-in-law did so, and the fool as he sat in
the sledge, said:

“At the pike’s behest, and at my request, set forward, sledge, to the
forest.”

At these words the sledge forthwith went forth.  The country people
living around were quite astounded to see Emelian riding in the sledge
without horses, and going with such speed that, even if the best pair of
horses in the world had been fastened to the sledge, it would have been
impossible to go quicker.  Now as it was necessary for the fool, in order
to reach the forest, to go through the town, he drove through it at full
speed; but as he did not know that it was necessary for him to cry out,
in order that the people might not be run over, he drove through the city
without crying to the people to get out of the way, and ran over a great
number of them, and although they gave chase to him, yet it was
impossible to overtake him.  Emelian, having passed through the city and
reached the wood, stopped the sledge.  The fool then getting out of the
sledge, said:

“At the pike’s behest, and at my request, fall, hatchet, now to cutting
wood; and do you, wood, gather yourself into the sledge and be corded.”

Scarcely had the fool said these words when the hatchet began to cut
wood, and the wood, gathering itself up, placed itself in the sledge, and
tied itself with the cord.  After he had cut as much wood as he wanted,
he ordered the hatchet to cut down a small oak; and when the hatchet had
done so, he placed himself upon the load, and said:

“At the pike’s behest, and at my request, O sledge, now travel home.”

The sledge instantly set off very briskly.  But when Emelian arrived at
the city in which he had run over so many people, the folks were waiting
for him in order to seize him, and as soon as he drove into the city they
set about dragging him off the load and began to belabour him.  The fool,
seeing that they were pulling him and beating him, said these words, in
an undertone:

“At the pike’s behest, and at my request, now, sapling, break their arms
and legs.”

Forthwith the sapling, springing out, began to beat them in a pretty
manner, and the people taking to flight, the fool drove out of the town
to his own village, whilst the sapling drubbed all soundly, and went in
pursuit of them.  Emelian, on reaching his home, mounted upon the petsch.

In the meantime, after he had driven out of the city, there was much talk
of him everywhere,—not because he had driven over a number of people, but
because he had come driving to the city on a sledge without horses; and
by degrees the news reached the court, and came to the ears of the king
himself.  The king, on hearing the story, felt no little desire to see
the fool, and sent an officer with some soldiers to seek him.  The
officer proceeded without delay out of the city, taking the road by which
the fool had travelled in order to go to the forest.  On arriving at the
village where Emelian lived, the officer sent for the starost, or head
man of the village, and said to him:

“I am sent by the king to take your fool, and convey him to his
presence.”

The starost immediately showed him the house where Emelian lived, and the
officer, going into the kitchen, demanded—

“Where’s the fool?”

The fool, who was lying on the petsch, answered—

“What’s that to you?”

“What’s that to me?  Dress yourself quickly that I may carry you to the
presence of the king.”

Quoth Emelian:

“What have I to do there?”

The officer, enraged at his answering so disrespectfully, struck him on
the cheek.  The fool, feeling himself struck, said softly:

“At the pike’s behest, and at my request, oak sapling, break their hands
and shins.”

The sapling hopping forth, began to beat them, drubbing them all
preciously, both officer and soldiers, so that the officer was obliged to
return discomfited.  Arriving at the city, he related to the king how the
fool had beaten them all.  The king was very much astonished, and did not
believe it possible that he could have beaten so many.  The king,
however, selected a prudent man, whom he sent with an injunction to bring
the fool to him if possible, even though he should have recourse to
deceit.  The king’s envoy, arriving at the village where Emelian lived,
sent for the starost, and said to him:

“I am sent by the king to fetch your fool; but first of all, bring before
me the people with whom he lives.”

The starost instantly ran and brought the sisters-in-law; and the envoy
asked them—

“What does the fool like?”

The sisters-in-law replied:

“Gracious, sir, our fool likes to be intreated to do a thing; he refuses
once and twice in order to be entreated a third time, when he never
refuses, but does all that he is asked,—but he does not like to be spoken
to roughly.”

The envoy then dismissed them, warning them not to tell Emelian that he
had sent for them.  After that, having bought some raisins, prunes, and
dried figs, he proceeded to the house of the fool, and on his arrival he
went up to the petsch, and said:

“How’s this, Emelian, why are you lying on the petsch?”

Then, giving him the raisins, prunes, and dried figs, he said:

“Come, Emelian, I will carry you to the king.”

But the fool answered:

“I am warm here,” for he loved nothing but warmth.

“Let us go, Emelian,” said the envoy, “you will be quite comfortable
there.”

“Aye,” said the fool, “but I am lazy.”

Thereupon the envoy began to beseech him once more.

“Pray let us go, Emelian, the king has ordered a red caftan to be made
for you, and also a red cap, and red boots.”

The fool, hearing that a red caftan had been ordered to be made for him,
provided he went, said: “Do you go before, and I will follow.”

The envoy, not wishing to trouble him any more, left him, and asked
privately of the sisters-in-law whether the fool would not deceive him;
but they assured him that he never deceived anybody.  The envoy then set
forth on his return, and the fool, placing himself once more on the
petsch, said:

“O how I wish that I had not to go to court, but was there already.”

Thereupon he said:

“At the pike’s behest, and at my request, move straight, O petsch, to the
city.”

Thereupon the walls of the room gave a crack, and the petsch sallied
forth, and when the petsch was clear of the house it drove along with
such rapidity that it was impossible to overtake it.  On the road it
overtook the envoy, and drove in his company to the court.  The king,
being told that the fool had arrived, went out to look at him, with all
his ministers, and seeing that Emelian came on the petsch, he was filled
with wonder.  As for the fool, he lay still, and said nothing.  After a
little time the king asked him why he had run over so many people when he
went to the forest for wood.

“How could I help it?” said Emelian; “why did they not get out of my
way?”

Just then, the king’s daughter came to a window, and looked at the fool.
Emelian, chancing to turn his eye to the window from which she was
looking, and seeing that she was very handsome, said in an undertone:

“At the pike’s behest, and at my request, may yon beauty fall in love
with me.”

No sooner had he pronounced these words than the daughter of the king
fell in love with him as she gazed upon him.  And the fool, after that,
said:

“At the pike’s behest, and at my request, move back, petsch, to our own
house.”

The petsch, without a moment’s delay, marched out of the court, drove
through the city, and made for home, where, on arriving, it resumed its
former place.

After that Emelian lived for some time quite at his ease; but the king,
in the city, fared very differently, for the princess, having fallen in
love with the fool at the words which he had uttered, began to beg of her
father to give her the fool for a husband.  The king was very much
incensed both against her and the fool, and wished very much to lay
violent hands on the latter, but did not know how.  Thereupon the king’s
ministers proposed that the officer who had before gone for Emelian, and
had failed to bring him, should be sent again for him on account of his
former failure.  The king, approving of their counsel, summoned the
officer to his presence, and when he appeared before him, the king said:

“Listen, friend, I sent thee for the fool before: but thou didst not
bring him; now for that offence I will send thee a second time, and in
order that thou mayest bring him without fail, I tell thee that if thou
dost bring him thou shalt be rewarded, and if thou dost not thou shalt be
punished.”

The officer, on hearing the words of the king departed without delay in
quest of the fool, and having arrived at the village, he sent again for
the starost, and said to him:

“Here is money for you, buy all that is necessary for a good dinner
to-morrow, invite Emelian, and when he is dining with you ply him with
drink until he falls under the table.”

The starost, knowing that he was sent by the king, did not dare to
disobey him, but purchased all that was necessary, and invited the fool.
Emelian having promised to come, the officer expected him with great joy;
and the fool coming the next day, they plied him so hard with drink that
Emelian lay down and fell dead asleep.  The officer, seeing that he was
asleep, immediately ordered his kabitka to be got ready, and to draw up
to the door, and when it drew up they placed the fool in it.  After that
the officer got into the kabitka, and carried him straight to the court.
The ministers forthwith gave information to the king of the arrival of
the officer, and the king no sooner heard of it than he gave orders for a
great barrel to be well fenced with iron hoops, which was forthwith done,
and the barrel was brought to the king, who, seeing that all was ready,
ordered his daughter and the fool to be placed in the barrel, and the
barrel to be covered with pitch.  No sooner had this been done than he
commanded the barrel to be cast into the sea, and was forthwith obeyed.
The king then returned to his palace, and the barrel, abandoned to its
fate, floated about for some hours.  The fool all this time was asleep;
awaking, however, at last, and perceiving that he was in darkness, he
asked of himself—“Where am I?” for he imagined that he was alone.

“You are in a barrel, Emelian,” said the princess; “and they have placed
me with you.”

“And who are you?” asked the fool.

“I am the king’s daughter,” she replied; and then she related on what
account she had been placed in the barrel with him.

Thereupon she begged him to deliver himself and her from the barrel.  But
the fool made no other reply than—

“I am warm enough here.”

“Pray have mercy upon me,” said the princess.  “Take compassion on my
tears, and deliver me out of this barrel.”

“I’ll do no such thing,” said Emelian, “I am lazy.”

The princess began again to beseech him:

“Have mercy upon me, Emelian; save me out of this barrel, and do not let
me die.”

The fool, being moved by her entreaties and tears, said to her:

“Very well, I will do this one thing for you.”  After that, he said
softly to himself: “At the pike’s behest, and at my request, cast up, O
sea, this barrel, in which we lie, on some dry place, as near as possible
to our own country; and do thou, barrel on coming to dry ground, go to
pieces of thyself.”

Scarcely had the fool uttered these words when the sea began to heave,
and forthwith cast the barrel on dry ground, whereupon the barrel went to
pieces of itself.  Emelian arose, and went with the princess farther up
the land on which they were cast, and the fool perceived that they were
upon a very beautiful island, on which were a great number of trees of
different kinds, and with all kinds of fruits; and the princess, seeing
these things, was very much rejoiced that they were upon so beautiful an
island.  In a little time, however, she said:

“But Emelian, where are we to live, for here I don’t see a hut or any
kind of shelter?”

But the fool said:

“You are already hankering for something more.”

“Do be so kind, Emelian, as to order some kind of house to be built,”
said the princess, “in order that we may have some place to take shelter
in when it rains;” for by this time the princess knew that he could do
anything if he did but please.

But the fool said:

“I am lazy.”

Whereupon she began to beseech him again, and Emelian, touched by her
entreaties, was obliged to do what she desired; and going a little way
apart from her, said:

“At the pike’s behest, and at my request, may there be erected, in the
midst of this island, a palace which shall be twice better than the
king’s; and may there be from the palace a crystal bridge to cross the
water by; and may there be in the palace all kinds of servants.”

Scarcely had he pronounced these words when an enormous palace with a
crystal bridge made its appearance.  The fool and the princess, entering
the palace, perceived that there was plenty of magnificent furniture in
the rooms, and that there were numbers of people, both lackeys and
officers, of various descriptions, who were awaiting the commands of the
fool.  The fool, seeing that all these people had a decent and honourable
appearance, and that he alone was a lout, wished to be made better, and
therefore said:

“At the pike’s behest, and at my request, be I now made a youth so
handsome as to have no equal, and possest of the very best of
understandings.”

These words were scarcely uttered when he became so handsome and
intelligent that everybody wondered.  After this, Emelian sent one of his
servants to the king, to invite him and all his ministers to the palace.
The messenger of Emelian rode to the king over that same crystal bridge
which the fool had built.  On his arrival at court the ministers
presented him to the king, whom the messenger addressed in this manner:

“Gracious sir, I am sent by my master with his humble compliments to
invite you to dinner.”

“Who is thy master?” demanded the king.

But the messenger replied:

“I cannot tell you, gracious sir, anything of my master” (for the fool
had forbidden him to say who he was); “but after you have dined together
he will give you a full account of himself.”

The king, filled with curiosity to know who it could be that invited him
to dinner, told the messenger that he would come without fail; and the
messenger forthwith returned.  Scarcely had he arrived when the king,
with all his ministers, came riding over the bridge to dine with the
fool.  On the arrival of the king at the palace Emelian went out to meet
him, took him by the hand white as snow, kissed him on the mouth sweet as
sugar, and leading him into his palace of white marble, set him down to
the oaken table to the feast of sweet things and mead; and the king and
his ministers, sitting at the table, drank, ate, and were merry.  Now
when they got up from table, and sat in their places, the fool said to
the king:

“Gracious sir; do you know me, and who I am?”

But as Emelian was then in a splendid dress, and moreover as his face was
very handsome, it was impossible to recognise him.  Therefore the king
said that he did not know him.  But the fool said to him:

“Gracious sir, do you not remember how a certain fool came driving to
your court on a petsch, and how you shut him up with your daughter in a
barrel, which you covered over with pitch, and cast out upon the sea?
Know now that I am that very same Emelian.”

The king, seeing that it was the fool who was now before him, was very
much frightened, and did not know what to do.  But the fool at that
moment went for the princess, and led her before the king.  The king on
seeing his daughter was very much delighted, and said to the fool:

“I have sinned grievously against you; I therefore give you my daughter
as a wife.”

The fool, on hearing these words, most humbly thanked the king; and as
Emelian had everything ready for the marriage, it was celebrated that day
with great magnificence.  On the next day the fool gave a magnificent
banquet to all the ministers, whilst for the common people hogsheads were
brought out, full of all kinds of drinks.  When the rejoicing was over
the king offered to resign his kingdom to him, but he refused to accept
it.  Thereupon the king returned to his dominions.  But the fool remained
in his palace, and lived in great happiness and prosperity.

                                * * * * *

                                  LONDON
               Printed for THOMAS J. WISE, Hampstead, N.W.
                   _Edition limited to Thirty Copies_.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMELIAN THE FOOL***


******* This file should be named 26789-0.txt or 26789-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/6/7/8/26789



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

